Entity states
New (Transient) - new entity, not mapped to a database row.
Once it becomes managed, the persistence context will issue an insert statement at flush-time.

Managed (Persistent) - entity associated with a database row and managed by the current running persistence context.
State changes are detected via dirty checking mechanism and propagated to the database as updates at flush-time.

Detached - when the persistent context closes, all managed entities become detached.
Successive changes will no longer be tracked, and no automatic database synchronization is going to happen.

Removed - entity is scheduled for deletion and the actual database delete statement is executed during flushing.

SessionFactory (Hibernate) / EntityManagerFactory (JPA)
Singleton, manages the second level caches, connection pools and acts as a factory for Sessions
All Sessions / EntityManagers have access to the second level cache
The second-level cache has to use a clustered cache implementation if the application is distributed

Session (Hibernate) / EntityManager (JPA)
Thread scoped, manages the first level cache, wraps a JDBC Connection and a acts as a factory for Transaction instances
The first level cache is not shared between Transactions
The EntityManager / Session are gateways towards the underlying persistence context
The persistence context captures entity state changes and during flushing translates them to SQL statements
You can configure when the flushing takes place on a Session basis (after statement / after transaction / manual)
The persistence context has to be (manually) flushed before native queries in order to ensure consistency

Transaction (Hibernate) / EntityTransaction (JPA)
Thread scoped object used for individual transactions

Prefer numerical sequences over UUIDs for PK, since numerical sequences take less space to store and index.
Numerical sequences also avoid fragmentation for clustered indexes.

Each time you fetch the same entity from the db the same instance is returned by Hibernate
Read and write skew can happen if multiple entities that should be updated atomically from a business perspective
are updated in parts

Eager fetching does not necessarily imply using a single query, only that dependencies are fetched before the entity is
returned to the caller.

Entity relationships can be either unidirectional or bidirectional. For bidirectional mappings, having the side that
has the private key (for one to one and one to many) manage the synchronization is better from a performance standpoint

Clustered index: rows are stored physically in the same order as in the index, can be only one per table (PK).

Cache synchronization
Cache-aside - manage both cache and DB from application side
Read-through - manage only the cache, on reads the cache is searched first and if there's a miss the db in queried
Write-through - manage only the cache, on writes the cache updates the db
Write-behind - manage only the cache, with additional batching in order to reduce db trips for writes

Fetch modes (@Fetch annotation)
SELECT - fetch lazily using a secondary select for each entity (similar with Lazy from JPA)
JOIN - use an outer join to load the related entities (similar with Eager from JPA / fetch join from JPQL)
SUBSELECT - for lazy collections only, loads all elements of all collections of the same role for all owners associated
with the persistence context using a single secondary select